---
title: "Worker Health and Well-being in Ontario's Electrical Sector: A Quantitative Study of Occupational Health Outcomes"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
excerpt: 'Using a Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) informed lens, we conducted a cross-sectional online survey of electricians in Ontario (n=188), assessing musculoskeletal symptoms (12-month), sleep quality, psychological distress, burnout (personal, work-related), and job satisfaction.'
date: 2025-12-05
venue: 'Frontiers of Public Health'
---
Abstract

In Canada, Ontario’s shortage of electricians is linked to high physical demands and psychosocial stressors that may undermine worker well-being.  Using a Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) informed lens, we conducted a cross-sectional online survey of electricians in Ontario (n=188), assessing musculoskeletal symptoms (12-month), sleep quality, psychological distress, burnout (personal, work-related), and job satisfaction. Overall, 90.2% reported at least one musculoskeletal symptom in the past 12 months. Regression analyses revealed that sleep quality and years of experience significantly predicted psychological distress and burnout, with poorer sleep linked to higher personal and work-related burnout, greater psychological distress, and lower job satisfaction (SDGs 3, 8, 9). More years of experience were associated with lower distress and burnout. Women reported higher psychological distress than men, highlighting inequality and discrimination in male-dominated trades (SDGs 5, 10). Apprentices experienced greater psychological distress (8.96 (SD = 8.2996)) than non-apprentices (4.99 (SD = 6.59)), reflecting vulnerabilities associated with low wages, job insecurity, and a lack of support (SDGs 1, 11). These findings highlight the complex interplay of physical, psychological, and socio-structural factors in shaping electricians’ health. Targeted interventions are crucial for promoting sustainable and inclusive skilled trade environments. 

Keywords: Electricians, Occupational Health, Burnout, Sleep Quality, Musculoskeletal disorders, Apprentices, Psychological Distress, Ontario, Canada 

Article DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2025.1735294

