---
title: "An environmental scan of Indian children with mobility-related disabilities requiring assistive devices"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
excerpt: 'As of 2023, an estimated 3.28 million children in India are living with mobility-related disabilities, and approximately 37.3% would likely benefit from a mobility device. Limited access highlights the need for targeted services, emphasizing early identification, device prescription, and caregiver education to support functional independence.'
date: 2025-11-01
venue: 'Indian Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation (Accepted)'
---
Abstract

Context: Access to assistive technology (AT) is significantly limited in low- and middle-income countries, where only 3% of individuals have access compared to 90% in high-income countries. Despite this urgent need there remains a critical lack of data on the prevalence of pediatric disability and the associated need for mobility devices. 
Aims: This study aims to estimate the prevalence of children living with mobility-related disabilities in India and the proportion who would benefit from a mobility device.
Methods and Material: An environmental scan, informed by scoping review methodology, was conducted to synthesize both peer-reviewed and grey literature on pediatric disability in India. Population estimates were derived from the 2011 Census and data from the World Health Organization as of 2023. Prevalence estimates for cerebral palsy and other mobility-related disabilities were used to project the current pediatric population with mobility-related disabilities. Additionally, published distributions of the Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) levels were used to determine the proportion of children likely to benefit from mobility devices.
Results: As of 2023, an estimated 3.28 million children in India are living with a mobility-related disability. Of this population, approximately 37.3% would likely benefit from a mobility device.
Conclusions: These findings underscore the substantial need for mobility devices among children with mobility-related disabilities and highlight the urgent demand for improved access to pediatric assistive technology. Additionally, the findings inform rehabilitation professionals and assistive technology vendors about the potential market size and unmet needs in the region.
Key-words: assistive technology, mobility devices, pediatric disability, mobility-related disabilities, rehabilitation professionals
