---
title: "The Differential Roles of Minority Stressors in LGB Identity Disclosure"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
excerpt: 'In this study, we examine how minority stressors (i.e., everyday discrimination, felt stigma, and internalized stigma) jointly contribute to sexual orientation disclosure. To do so, we use a national probability sample of 944 LGB adults and two distinct measures of disclosure (i.e., outness and disclosure behavior). We then compared four different path models that capture the relationships between minority stressors and disclosure. Among the two supported models, we find that 1) outness is best predicted by internalized stigma, and disclosure behavior is best predicted by everyday discrimination, and 2) everyday discrimination indirectly predicts both disclosure outcomes through increasing felt stigma and internalized stigma. In sum, this work suggests that everyday discrimination is the beginning of a cascade in sexual orientation disclosure, which provides an important theoretical contribution in understanding how minority stress relates to disclosure as well as implications for social actions.'
date: 2025-05-01
venue: 'Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity (Under Review)'
citation: 'K. Colin Li1, Javier Mencia Ledo1, and Rebecca Neel1'
---
Sexual minorities face multiple distinct stressors, including internalized stigma, felt stigma, and everyday discrimination. Prior research shows that for sexual minorities, these stressors are critical to their decisions to disclose their sexual orientation. However, many prior studies examined each stressor independently. It remains unclear whether and how each minority stressor uniquely contributes to disclosure, and how they may relate to one another in this process. This study addresses these gaps by using a national probability dataset of lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) people in the United States (N = 944) that measured general outness (i.e., how out you are to others) and disclosure behavior (i.e., told someone you’re LGB for the first time). Using multilevel path analysis, we tested a linear model and three distinct mediation models that describe the process of how minority stressors affect outness and disclosure behavior. Results revealed that when all minority stressors are considered simultaneously, disclosure behavior is best predicted by everyday discrimination, whereas outness is best predicted by internalized stigma. In addition, the best-fitting mediation model suggests that everyday discrimination predicts internalized stigma and felt stigma, which in turn predict less outness, but more disclosure behavior. Together, this work clarifies the role of each minority stressor and deepens a theoretical understanding of how minority stressors shape disclosure.
